<!-- Generated by proposal2md. -->

**3GPP TSG-CT WG4 Meeting #134** **C4-261072**

**Valetta, Malta; 13th – 17th April 2026**

**Source: Verizon**

**Title: Pseudo-CR on Existing protocol limitations and 6G protocol framework enhancement to support programmable parameter**

**Spec: 3GPP TR 29840 0.0.0**

**Agenda item: 21.2**

**Document for: Agreement**

**1. Introduction**

The transition from point to point communication model to 5G consumer-producer SBA/SBI model was intended to improve software development cycles, scaling and deployment life cycle. However, the proliferation of NFs and various Service APIs has introduced significant interdependencies. The introduction of new features currently requires coordinated software updates across multiple NFs to handle new parameters, even when those NFs do not perform logic on said parameters. There are gaps related to version negotiations and upgrade of NFs, introducing custom parameters during the message exchange between NFs and overall programmability aspects of including or removing parameters dynamically. This paper discusses the necessity of flexible 6G protocol framework to support programmable parameters and enhanced service routing to mitigate deployment risks and reduce the time to market timelines

**2. Reason for Change**

**Observation 1. Parameter pass-through bottlenecks**

In the current 5G protocols, many parameters such as specific UDM/USR subscription attributes, policy attributes and feature negotiation bits are treated as “opaque” by consumer and producers but still require schema updates to be transported. In a multi vendor environment, this creates a long lead time for feature enablement.

**Limitation :** In existing protocol implementation, NF’s must undergo development and testing cycle just to support the transport of attributes they do not act upon.

**Proposal :** 6G protocol study should introduce a Programmable Parameter Framework where select attributes (e.g., policy, subscription info, capability related parameters) can be introduced dynamically without modifying the service logic/software/schema of every intermediate NF. E.g., Metadata container with Schema-less Extensions to enable plug and play parameters. The select attribute shall pass-though the intermediate NFs

**Observation 2.  Control plane functionality explosion and Routing complexity**

Operators have observed exponential increase in control plane functionality in 5G and due to static protocol and traditional json resulted in longer deployment timeline issues. Introduction of new RAT type for RedCap, Rel19 MINPA feature, Advanced slice features etc are classic example of this issue. 6G is expected to see an explosion in control plane functionality due to AI driven services and enhanced subscriber profile controls. Some of the local configurations at NF needs to be reevaluated for operator to implement local policies and regional and regulatory requirements. Current protocol implementation and traditional upgrades to introduce new services risk jeopardizing existing core stability and creates development stability.

**Limitation :** Relying on traditional software upgrades to introduce new services via traditional API/YAML based implementation in the existing protocol requires long lead time in a multi-vendor environment and may further risk jeopardizing existing core stability and creates deployment bottleneck

**Proposal :** 6G protocol study 6G protocol study should evaluate a protocol framework enhancement to support the programmable logic for Metadata processing. This would utilize potentially a service profile containing a combination of triggers, routing applets and service characteristics. Allowing features to be introduced via configuration rather than hard coded logic. E.g., WASM(WebAssembly)-based Routing Applets to enable hot-swapping without need for full blown software upgrade on core NFs.

**3. Conclusions**

To ensure 6G can meet the agility requirements of AI enabled network and speed up the 6G services time to market timeline, it is proposed that 6G protocol needs to be programmable to avoid above mentioned parameter pass-though bottlenecks and traditional software development delays in introducing new control plane functionalities.

**4. Proposal**

It is proposed to agree the following changes to 3GPP TR 29.840 to add General protocol requirements.

To ensure 6G can meet the agility requirements of AI enabled network and speed up the 6G services time to market timelines, 6G protocol framework shall

- Include programmable/extensible attributes that bypasses the need for per NF software updates for simple pass through data

- Introduce pluggable YAML file extension for 6G Core, enabling a trigger based routing mechanism (Trigger + Routing Applet + Priority) to streamline new service enablement and enable reuse of basic services/API

- OpenAPI extension to enable the use of schema-less dynamic metadata and concepts similar to WASM(WebAssembly) routing applet

**Example :** AI Agent Identity verification at AMF.

UDR stores the AI agent metadata, rel 21 it may be just “AI Agent Identity”, rel22 may require addition of a new parameter say “AI Agent vendor”, with the use of metadata adding AI Agent vendor attribute will be transparent to underlying NF software. Simple logics and AMF actions could be implemented in the applet making the deployment easier.

yaml

components:

schemas:

*# 1. The Dynamic Metadata in Subscription Profile*

AiAgentMetadata:

type: object

additionalProperties: true

example:

aiAgentId: "urn:3gpp:ai-agent:auto-pilot-v2"

trustLevel: "high"

vendor: "Manufacturer-X"

*# 2. The Verification Logic (Protocol Hook)*

*# This applet is executed by the AMF to compare UDR data vs UE data*

IdentityVerificationApplet:

type: object

properties:

verificationBinary:

$ref: 'TS29571_CommonData.yaml#/components/schemas/Uri'

actionOnMismatch:

type: string

enum: [REJECT, LIMIT_ACCESS, LOG_ONLY]

*# 3. Extension to the Subscription Data Model*

AmfSubscriptionDataExtension:

type: object

properties:

aiAgentInfo:

$ref: '#/components/schemas/AiAgentMetadata'

verificationLogic:

$ref: '#/components/schemas/IdentityVerificationApplet'

* * * First Change * * * *

# 6 Protocols Framework for 6G CN Control Plane

This clause will analyse the protocols framework for the technical realization of the Control Plane within the 6G Core Network, will review the potential limitations of the CN protocol framework defined in 5GS, study possible improvements or simplifications to overcome the identified limitations, and study the possible protocol framework impacts required to support 6G services and requirements (including enabling the use of AI (e.g. AI agent)).

## 6.1 General

## 6.2 Analysis of 5G protocol framework limitations

The technical realization of the existing Control Plane protocol framework exhibits two primary structural limitation and these limitations remain protocol agnostic for several generation.

- the protocol ossification due to rigid schema coupling has resulted in deployment delays. Current 5G protocols require every network function to support and validate the specific schema of a parameter to facilitate its transport, creating a passthrough bottleneck. The absence of a standardized, extensible metadata container prevents dynamic introduction of new parameters without coordinated multi vendor software upgrade across the signalling path.

- lack of programmable logic layer hooks in protocol framework has resulted in the static execution logic and routing inflexibility. The existing protocol framework relies on static API definition and hard coded service logic in the NF software. The current protocol doesn’t support the native protocol mechanism to inject granular, trigger/event-driven logic or applets into the message handling flow. This has led to high-risk software upgrades rather than agile cloud native deployments.

* * * Second Change * * * *

## 6.3 6G Protocol framework requirements

The technical realization of the of 6G protocol frameworks should follow design principles such as cloud nativeness, agility, improve sustainability and robustness.

- the 6G protocol framework shall support programmable/extensible attributes in the form of a metadata container with a schemeless extension that bypass the need for per NF software upgrade for a simple pass-though parameters.

- the 6G protocol framework shall support pluggable yaml file extensions to enable a event/trigger based routing mechanism (trigger + routing applet + priority) to streamline new service enablement and facilitate the reuse of basic services/APIs

- the 6G protocol framework shall support OpenAPI extension to enable the use of schema-less dynamic metadata and concepts similar to routing applet

* * * Third Change * * * *

## 6.4 Candidate solutions

### 6.4.1 Solution 1 – Extensible metadata framework for schemaless attribute transport

#### 6.4.1.1 General

The 6G control plane protocol framework shall support mechanism to support programmable/extensible attributes to minimize the impacts to NFs when introducing new 3gpp defined parameters.

- 6G protocol framework shall introduce a standardized metadata container within the candidate 6G protocol  utilizing the OpenAPI extensions, e.g., ‘additionalProperties: true’.

### 6.4.2 Solution 2 – Programmable logic layer via routing applets

#### 6.4.2.1 General

The 6G control plane protocol framework shall support a pluggable yaml file extensions to introduce programmable logic layer for easy enablement of simple 6G features.

- 6G protocol framework shall support programmable logic layer via pluggable yaml file extensions to enable trigger based routing mechanism. Programmable protocol layer should utilize mechanism similar to ‘trigger+routing applets+priority’ to enable the event driven message processing logic.(e.g., WASM(WebAssembly))

* * * End of Changes * * * *
